# Qlattice

A simple lattice QCD library.

## Installation:

### Install on Ubuntu

`$ sudo apt-get install -y meson cython3 ninja-build python3-sympy python3-numpy python3-scipy python3-psutil libeigen3-dev libgsl-dev libopenmpi-dev libfftw3-dev zlib1g-dev libssl-dev libmpfr-dev libhdf5-mpi-dev libhdf5-dev`

`$ export prefix=DEST_DIRECTORY`

#### Qlattice only

`$ ./build.sh`

#### Qlattice and Grid/GPT

`$ ./scripts/download-core.sh`

`$ ./build.sh default-gpt`

### General instructions

The library itself is only composed of header files located in the `qlat` directory.

The major dependencies can be downloaded with

`$ ./scripts/download.sh`

These dependencies will be downloaded to the `distfiles` directory.

There are scripts in the `scripts` directory used to install the dependencies.

To install, we first set the `prefix` environment variable to specify the target directory.

`$ export prefix=DEST_DIRECTORY`

If `$prefix` is not set, the default value in `conf.sh` is used, which is `$HOME/qlat-build/default`.

The `build.sh` will install everything into the `$prefix` directory by running all the scripts in the `scripts` directory. For example, the following command will install everything into `DEST_DIRECTORY`.

`$ ./build.sh`

On some systems, one may need to specify the system type:

`$ ./build.sh TARGET`

`TARGET` can be `default`, `default-gpt`, `uconn`, `qcdserver`, `bnlknl`, `summit`, ... This script will call `./scripts/build.TARGET.sh` to perform relevant builds.

The environment variables needed to use the library can be set with the following command:

`$ source DEST_DIRECTORY/setenv.sh`

There are few different scripts to build the `Grid` library. Choose one best suit the machine (or create a custom one).

After the first complete install, one can re-install individual components by running the specific script. For example, to just re-install the `Qlattice` header files and python library:

`$ ./scripts/qlat-utils.sh`

`$ ./scripts/qlat.sh`

It is also possible to build `Grid` and `gpt`. For examples:

`$ ./scripts/grid.avx2.sh`

`$ ./scripts/gpt.sh`

It may be convenient to create a symbolic link `$HOME/qlat-build/default`, which points to the actual directory `DEST_DIRECTORY`. The `prefix` environment variable can be empty if the symbolic link is created.

### Install on UCONN HPC

First, download dependencies downloaded to the `distfiles` directory.

`$ ./scripts/download.sh`

Note you may need to download on your local computer and copy the data to the server.

The default build and installation directory is `$HOME/qlat-build/default`. If a different directory is needed:

`$ export prefix=DEST_DIRECTORY`

Run the build script:

`$ ./scripts/build.uconn.run.sh`

The script will submit a job to build everything needed.

You can also use the following command to obtain an interactive session on a computing node:

`$ fisbatch -n 2 -p generalsky`

Then run

`$ ./build.sh uconn`

Exit the interactive session after build is finished.

`$ exit`

## Install on new machines

If there is no existing `./scripts/build.TARGET.sh` for the machine. You may need to create a new one. Also, you may need to create a `./scripts/setenv.TARGET.sh` script.

The purpose of the `./scripts/setenv.TARGET.sh` is to create the `DEST_DIRECTORY/setenv.sh` scripts, which can be sourced to set the environmental variables. The `DEST_DIRECTORY/setenv.sh` scripts will be sourced automatically in all the other installation scripts (e.g. `./scripts/qlat.sh`).

The `./scripts/compiler-wrappers.sh` script will create the following wrappers:

`DEST_DIRECTORY/bin/CC.sh`

`DEST_DIRECTORY/bin/CXX.sh`

`DEST_DIRECTORY/bin/MPICC.sh`

`DEST_DIRECTORY/bin/MPICXX.sh`

These wrappers will simply try to call the appropriate corresponding compiler.

The environment variables, `CC`, `CXX`, `MPICC`, `MPICXX`, affect most installation scripts in `./scripts`. If these environment variables are empty, then the default `setenv.sh` will set them to use the wrappers created by `./scripts/compiler-wrappers.sh`. This behavior can be overridden by setting these environment variables to the desired non-empty value in `./scripts/setenv.TARGET.sh` or `./scripts/build.TARGET.sh`.

Once `python3` is available, the compiler wrappers will support the `--wrapper-remove-arg=` option. One can set `CFLAGS` and/or `CXXFLAGS` with this option to remove some unwanted flags generated by the configure script.

## Usage:

A sample `Makefile` is provided which can compile and run a simple program using the library. The `Makefile` assumes that the library and all its dependencies are installed in their default locations.

There are also example programs provided in the examples directory. Once the library is completed installed, one can run the following command to compile and run all the examples:

`./scripts/qlat-examples-cpp.sh`
`./scripts/qlat-examples-py-gpt.sh`
`./scripts/qlat-examples-py.sh`

## Structure

```c++
const int DIMN = 4;
struct Coordinate : public array<int, DIMN> {};
```

### GeometryNode

```c++
struct GeometryNode {
  bool initialized;
  int num_node;
  int id_node;
  Coordinate size_node;
  Coordinate coor_node;
};
```

### Geometry

```c++
struct Geometry {
  bool initialized;
  GeometryNode geon;
  int eo;  // 0:full; 1:odd; 2:even
  int multiplicity;
  Coordinate node_site;
  Coordinate expansion_left;
  Coordinate expansion_right;
  Coordinate node_site_expanded;
};
```

### vector and box

```c++
template <class M>
struct vector {
  bool is_copy;  // do not free memory if is_copy=true
  bool is_acc; // if place data on cudaMallocManaged memory (default false)
  Vector<M> v;
};
template <class M>
struct vector_acc : vector<M> {
  // default is_acc = true
};
```

```c++
template <class M>
struct box {
  bool is_copy;  // do not free memory if is_copy=true
  bool is_acc; // if place data on cudaMallocManaged memory (default false)
  Handle<M> v;
};
template <class M>
struct box_acc : box<M> {
  // default is_acc = true
};
```

### Field

```c++
template <class M>
struct Field {
  bool initialized;
  box_acc<Geometry> geo;
  vector_acc<M> field;
};
```

### FieldM

```c++
template <class M, int multiplicity>
struct FieldM : Field<M> {};
```

### SelectedField

```c++
template <class M>
struct SelectedField {
  bool initialized;
  long n_elems;
  box_acc<Geometry> geo;
  vector_acc<M> field;
};
```

### SelectedPoints

```c++
template <class M>
struct SelectedPoints {
  bool initialized;
  int multiplicity;
  long n_points;
  vector_acc<M> points;  // global quantity, same on each node
  // points.size() == n_points * multiplicity if initialized = true
};
```

## Random number generator description:

The state of the generator is effectively composed of the history of the generator encoded as a string.

To generate random numbers, one computes the SHA-256 hash of the string.  The hash result is viewed as a `8` 32-bit unsigned integers.

The `8` 32-bit unsigned integers are merged into `4` 64-bit unsigned integers. These `4` numbers are treated as the random numbers generated by this random number generator.

Relevant source files: `qutils/rng-state.h`

### Environment variables

- `q_end_time`

  Program finish time in seconds since epoch.

  Used when `check_time_limit()`.

  Default is empty.

  `q_time_limit`

  Total running time of program in seconds.

  Used when `check_time_limit()`, but will be override if `q_end_time` is set.

  Default is `43200`.

- `q_budget`

  Default budget time in seconds.

  Used when `check_time_limit()`.

  Default is `900`.

- `q_field_init`

  Control how field objects' data are initialized.

  Choices are `fast` (default), `zero`, `random`.

- `q_mem_cache_max_size`

  Memory cache size in MB (per processes) for `qlat::vector` allocation.

  Default is `512 MB`.

- `q_num_threads`

  Number of OpenMP threads (will be override by `OMP_NUM_THREADS`).

  Default is `2`.

- `q_acc_num_threads`

  Number of `qacc` threads.

  Default is `32`.

- `q_verbose`

  Level of verbosity. Need to be more than `0` for the timing info to be shown automatically.

  Default is `-1`.

- `q_timer_mini_auto_display`

  Minimum time between auto-display of timer information summary.

  Default is `5.0 * 60.0`.

- `q_timer_mini_auto_show`

  Minimum run time for a function for its information to be shown when it start or stop.

  Default is `1.0`.

- `q_timer_max_always_show`

  Maximum number of times to always show function start or stop.

  Default is `10`.

- `q_timer_max_func_name_len`

  Maximum length for a function name before truncation.

  Default is `50`.

- `q_malloc_mmap_threshold`

  In unit of bytes.

  Default is empty. It does not alter the system setting.

- `q_mk_id_node_in_shuffle_seed`

  Seed for initializing `id_node_in_shuffle`.

  Default is `4`. If start with `"seed_"`, then will be random initialization. Otherwise will be viewed as an int and used as `step_size`.

- `q_qar_multi_vol_max_size`

  Maximum size of a `qar` file in bytes. If the total size of the folder is larger, a multi-volume `qar` file will be created.

  Default is `500L * 1000L * 1000L * 1000L` (500 GB). If `q_qar_multi_vol_max_size` is negative, the size is unlimited.

  Will never split a single file into multiple `qar` volume. The limit may be exceeded due to the header size or a single file being too large.

### Useful options

- `OMP_STACKSIZE=8M` OpenMP option for setting per thread stack size.

- `--debug-signals` **Grid option** for intercept some errors.
