# Installation

`$ export prefix=DEST_DIRECTORY`

If `prefix` environmental variable is not set, the default location will be `$HOME/qlat-build/default`.

Optionally, you can also specify a temp directory with:

`$ export temp_dir=TEMP_DIRECTORY`

An efficient choice for `TEMP_DIRECTORY` can be `/dev/shm/$(whoami)/temp`.

## Install on Ubuntu

`$ sudo apt-get install -y python3-full`
`$ sudo apt-get install -y libopenmpi-dev ninja-build patchelf libeigen3-dev libgsl-dev zlib1g-dev libssl-dev libmpfr-dev`
`$ sudo apt-get install -y gnuplot texlive-metapost poppler-utils`
`$ sudo apt-get install -y libfftw3-dev`

### Qlattice only

`$ ./build.sh`

### Qlattice and Grid/GPT

`$ ./scripts/download-core.sh`

`$ ./build.sh default-gpt`

## Install on Mac

`$ brew install llvm autoconf automake coreutils flock findutils pkg-config`
`$ brew install open-mpi ninja patchelf eigen gsl zlib openssl@3 mpfr`
`$ brew install gnuplot texlive poppler`
`$ brew install fftw`

### Qlattice only

`$ ./build.sh`

`$ source DEST_DIRECTORY/setenv.sh`

### Qlattice and Grid/GPT

`$ ./scripts/download-core.sh`

`$ ./build.sh default-gpt`

`$ source DEST_DIRECTORY/setenv.sh`

## Install on UCONN HPC

First, download dependencies downloaded to the `distfiles` directory.

`$ ./scripts/download.sh`

Note you may need to download on your local computer and copy the data to the server.

Run the build script:

`$ ./build.sh uconn`

`$ source DEST_DIRECTORY/setenv.sh`

## General instructions

The library itself is only composed of header files located in the `qlat` directory.

The major dependencies can be downloaded with

`$ ./scripts/download.sh`

These dependencies will be downloaded to the `distfiles` directory.

There are scripts in the `scripts` directory used to install the dependencies.

To install, we first set the `prefix` environment variable to specify the target directory.

`$ export prefix=DEST_DIRECTORY`

If `$prefix` is not set, the default value in `conf.sh` is used, which is `$HOME/qlat-build/default`.

The `build.sh` will install everything into the `$prefix` directory by running all the scripts in the `scripts` directory. For example, the following command will install everything into `DEST_DIRECTORY`.

`$ ./build.sh`

On some systems, one may need to specify the system type:

`$ ./build.sh TARGET`

`TARGET` can be `default`, `default-gpt`, `uconn`, `qcdserver`, `bnlknl`, `summit`, ... This script will call `./scripts/build.TARGET.sh` to perform relevant builds.

The environment variables needed to use the library can be set with the following command:

`$ source DEST_DIRECTORY/setenv.sh`

There are few different scripts to build the `Grid` library. Choose one best suit the machine (or create a custom one).

After the first complete install, one can re-install individual components by running the specific script. For example, to just re-install the `Qlattice` header files and python library:

`$ ./scripts/qlat-utils.sh`
`$ ./scripts/qlat.sh`

It is also possible to build `CPS`, `Grid`, and `GPT`. For examples:

`$ ./scripts/qmp.sh`
`$ ./scripts/qio.sh`
`$ ./scripts/cps.sh`
`$ ./scripts/qlat-cps.sh`

`$ ./scripts/c-lime.sh`
`$ ./scripts/grid-clehner.avx2.sh`
`$ ./scripts/qlat-grid.sh`

`$ ./scripts/gpt.sh`

It may be convenient to create a symbolic link `$HOME/qlat-build/default`, which points to the actual directory `DEST_DIRECTORY`. The `prefix` environment variable can be empty if the symbolic link is created.

## Custom installation

If there is no existing `./scripts/build.TARGET.sh` for the machine. You may need to create a new one. Also, you may need to create a `./scripts/setenv.TARGET.sh` script.

The purpose of the `./scripts/setenv.TARGET.sh` is to create the `DEST_DIRECTORY/setenv.sh` scripts, which can be sourced to set the environmental variables. The `DEST_DIRECTORY/setenv.sh` scripts will be sourced automatically in all the other installation scripts (e.g. `./scripts/qlat.sh`).

The `./scripts/qcore.sh` script will create the following wrappers:

`DEST_DIRECTORY/qcore/bin/CC.sh`

`DEST_DIRECTORY/qcore/bin/CXX.sh`

`DEST_DIRECTORY/qcore/bin/MPICC.sh`

`DEST_DIRECTORY/qcore/bin/MPICXX.sh`

These wrappers will simply try to call the appropriate corresponding compiler.

The environment variables, `CC`, `CXX`, `MPICC`, `MPICXX`, affect most installation scripts in `./scripts`. If these environment variables are empty, then the default `setenv.sh` will use `qcore/setenv.sh` to set them to use the wrappers created by `./scripts/qcore.sh`. This behavior can be overridden by setting these environment variables to the desired non-empty value in `./scripts/setenv.TARGET.sh` or `./scripts/build.TARGET.sh`.

Once `python3` is available, the compiler wrappers will support the `--wrapper-remove-arg=` option. One can set `CFLAGS` and/or `CXXFLAGS` with this option to remove some unwanted flags generated by the configure script.

## Usage

The environment variables needed to use the library can be set with the following command:

`$ source DEST_DIRECTORY/setenv.sh`

There are example programs provided in the examples directory. Once the library is completed installed, one can run the following command to compile and run all the examples:

```
./scripts/qlat-examples-cpp.sh
./scripts/qlat-examples-py.sh
./scripts/qlat-examples-py-gpt.sh # require GPT
./scripts/qlat-examples-py-cps.sh # require CPS and qlat-cps
./scripts/qlat-examples-cpp-grid.sh # require Grid and qlat-grid
```
